FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS - HEDIS QUALITY MEASURES

=== MEMBER-LEVEL QUESTIONS ===

Q: How do I look up a specific member's quality status?
A: Use the lookup_member('MEMBER_ID') function for basic information and overall quality summary. The member_id must be in the format M000001, M000002, etc. This will return demographics, eligible measures count, compliant measures count, and open gaps count.

Q: How do I see all quality measures for a specific member?
A: Use lookup_member_measures('MEMBER_ID') to get a complete list of all applicable HEDIS measures for that member, including compliance status, last service date, and due dates.

Q: How do I find all open gaps for a member?
A: Use lookup_member_gaps('MEMBER_ID'). This returns only measures where the member has an open gap, with recommended gap closure actions and priority levels. If the member is fully compliant, this will return an empty result.

Q: What if a member ID is not found?
A: First, verify the member ID format - it should be M000001 (with leading zeros), not M1 or 000001. Check if the member is currently enrolled in the plan. You can also use Genie Space to search by name or other attributes if you're unsure of the member ID.

Q: Can I search for a member by name instead of ID?
A: Yes, use Genie Space with a natural language query like "Show me member named John Smith" or "Find members with last name Johnson". Once you have the member_id, you can use the UC Functions for detailed lookups.

Q: Why does a member show a gap when I know they completed the service?
A: There are several possible reasons:
   1. Claim not yet processed (typical lag: 7-14 days)
   2. Wrong CPT code used (must match HEDIS specifications)
   3. Service date was outside the measurement year
   4. Provider was out-of-network without authorization
   5. Gap closure data refresh happens nightly, check tomorrow
   
   To investigate, verify the claim was submitted, check the CPT code, and confirm the service date was within January 1 - December 31 of the measurement year.

Q: What does "At Risk" status mean?
A: "At Risk" means the member is currently compliant but approaching the due date for their next required service. For example, a diabetic member who had an HbA1c test 10 months ago is compliant now but at risk of becoming non-compliant in 2 months. Use members_at_risk('MEASURE_CODE') to identify these members proactively.

=== MEASURE-LEVEL QUESTIONS ===

Q: How do I see overall performance for a measure?
A: Use lookup_measure_performance('MEASURE_CODE') where MEASURE_CODE is BCS, CDC, CBP, COL, or OMW. This returns compliance rate, gap count, star rating projection, and revenue impact.

Q: Which members have a specific gap?
A: Use members_with_gap('MEASURE_CODE') to get a list of all members with an open gap for that measure. This is useful for creating outreach lists for gap closure campaigns.

Q: What are the valid measure codes?
A: The main HEDIS measure codes are:
   - BCS: Breast Cancer Screening
   - CDC: Comprehensive Diabetes Care
   - CBP: Controlling Blood Pressure
   - COL: Colorectal Cancer Screening
   - OMW: Osteoporosis Management in Women
   
   These codes are case-sensitive. Always use uppercase.

Q: How is compliance rate calculated?
A: Compliance rate = (Number of compliant members / Total eligible members) × 100
   For example, if 850 out of 1000 eligible members are compliant, the compliance rate is 85%.

Q: What's the difference between compliance rate and star rating?
A: Compliance rate is the percentage of eligible members who meet measure requirements (0-100%). Star rating is a 1-5 scale based on compliance rate thresholds and is weighted by measure importance. A measure can have 85% compliance but contribute differently to the overall star rating depending on its weight.

Q: Which measures are most important?
A: High-weight measures (3x multiplier) have the biggest impact on star rating and revenue:
   - CDC (Comprehensive Diabetes Care)
   - CBP (Controlling Blood Pressure)
   - COL (Colorectal Cancer Screening)
   
   Focus gap closure efforts on these measures first for maximum revenue impact.

=== GAP CLOSURE QUESTIONS ===

Q: How is a gap marked as closed?
A: A gap closes when a claim is received with:
   1. Correct CPT code for the measure requirement
   2. Service date within the measurement year (January 1 - December 31)
   3. Provider is in-network or authorized out-of-network
   4. Claim processes successfully without errors
   
   Gap closure updates happen nightly, so there may be a 1-day lag after claim processing.

Q: Can gaps be closed retroactively?
A: Yes, if the service was performed within the measurement year but the claim was delayed. You can submit claims up to the supplemental data deadline (March 31 of the following year). However, services performed outside the measurement year cannot be counted retroactively.

Q: What if a member refuses the screening?
A: Document the refusal in the medical record with:
   - Date of refusal
   - Reason given by member
   - Education provided about risks and importance
   - Member signature (if possible)
   
   Important: Documented refusal does NOT close the gap for HEDIS purposes. The member will still count as non-compliant. However, it documents your outreach effort for internal tracking and quality improvement purposes.

Q: How long does it take for a gap to close after the service is completed?
A: Timeline:
   - Service completed: Day 0
   - Provider submits claim: Day 0-14 (varies by provider)
   - Claim processes: Day 14-21 (average)
   - Gap closure update: Next nightly refresh (Day 22)
   
   Total typical time: 3-4 weeks from service to gap showing as closed.

Q: Can we close gaps with services from out-of-network providers?
A: Generally no, unless the out-of-network provider was specifically authorized. HEDIS requires services to be from in-network providers or specifically authorized out-of-network providers. Check with the provider network team if there's a question about a specific provider.

Q: What happens if we miss the December 31 deadline?
A: Services after December 31 count for the NEXT measurement year only. There is a supplemental data period (through March 31) to submit claims for services that occurred during the measurement year but hadn't been processed yet. However, new services performed after December 31 cannot be counted for the previous year.

=== COMPLIANCE QUESTIONS ===

Q: What is our current overall compliance rate?
A: Use Genie Space with a natural language query like "What is our overall compliance rate?" or "Show me compliance by measure". You can also check the quality_summary table for executive-level metrics.

Q: How many stars are we projected to achieve?
A: Use Genie Space to query "What is our projected star rating?" The projection is based on current compliance rates and weighted by measure importance. The lookup_measure_performance function also shows star rating for individual measures.

Q: Which measures have the biggest impact on our star rating?
A: High-weight measures (3x multiplier) have the biggest impact:
   - CDC (Comprehensive Diabetes Care)
   - CBP (Controlling Blood Pressure)  
   - COL (Colorectal Cancer Screening)
   
   Even small improvements in these measures significantly impact your overall star rating and revenue. Focus gap closure efforts here first.

Q: What compliance rate do we need for 4 stars?
A: Generally 80-89% overall weighted compliance. However, it's better to ensure no measure drops below 75% and that high-weight measures are above 80%. The weighted calculation means you need strong performance on CDC, CBP, and COL to reach 4 stars.

Q: How do we compare to national benchmarks?
A: National benchmarks (Medicare Advantage 2024):
   - BCS: 75-80% (top performers: 85%+)
   - CDC: 85-90% (top performers: 92%+)
   - CBP: 65-70% (top performers: 75%+)
   - COL: 70-75% (top performers: 80%+)
   
   Use Genie Space to compare your current rates to these benchmarks.

Q: What's our trend over time?
A: Use Genie Space with queries like "Show me compliance trend for CDC over the last 6 months" or "Compare our performance this quarter vs last quarter". The gap_closure_tracking table has historical data for trending analysis.

=== DATA QUESTIONS ===

Q: How often is data refreshed?
A: Quality tables are updated nightly at 2 AM Eastern. Claims typically process within 7-14 days of service date. So there's both a claims processing lag and a data refresh lag to consider.

Q: Why might a member show an open gap when I know the service was completed?
A: Possible reasons (in order of likelihood):
   1. Claim not yet processed - Check claims processing status
   2. Claim still in processing queue (7-14 day typical lag)
   3. Wrong CPT code - Service performed but code doesn't match HEDIS specifications
   4. Service date outside measurement year
   5. Provider not in network or not authorized
   6. Data refresh hasn't run yet - Check after next nightly update
   7. Claim denied - Check denial reason and consider appeal

Q: Can I see historical data?
A: Yes, Genie Space can query historical compliance rates and trends. Use queries like "Show me CDC compliance by month for the last year" or "Compare Q1 vs Q2 performance". The system retains 2 years of historical data.

Q: What's the difference between the different tables (quality_summary, measure_performance, member_measures)?
A: 
   - quality_summary: Executive dashboard view - overall org performance
   - measure_performance: Measure-specific aggregates - for reporting and tracking
   - member_measures: Member-level detail - for gap closure and outreach
   - gap_closure_tracking: Historical gap closure data - for trending
   
   Use quality_summary for executive reporting, measure_performance for measure-specific analysis, and member_measures for operational gap closure work.

Q: Why do member counts differ between reports?
A: Member eligibility can change during the measurement year due to:
   - New enrollments
   - Disenrollments
   - Age changes (turning 50, 75, etc.)
   - New diagnoses affecting measure eligibility (e.g., new diabetes diagnosis)
   
   Always use the most recent data and note the data extraction date on reports.

Q: Can I export the data to Excel?
A: Yes, Genie Space results can be exported. Use the export button in the Genie interface. For UC Functions results in the dashboard, use the download button in the results table.

=== TECHNICAL QUESTIONS ===

Q: What member ID format should I use?
A: Always use format M000001 with:
   - Uppercase 'M'
   - Six digits with leading zeros
   - Examples: M000001, M000567, M012345
   - Not: M1, m000001, 000001, or M-000001

Q: Are the UC Functions case-sensitive?
A: Yes, both function names and parameters are case-sensitive:
   - Correct: lookup_member('M000001')
   - Correct: members_with_gap('BCS')
   - Wrong: LOOKUP_MEMBER('M000001')
   - Wrong: members_with_gap('bcs')

Q: What if I get an error message?
A: Common errors and solutions:
   - "Member not found": Check member_id format and enrollment status
   - "Invalid measure code": Use BCS, CDC, CBP, COL, or OMW (uppercase)
   - "Function not found": Verify spelling and ensure you have proper permissions
   - "Connection timeout": Large result set - try narrowing your query or using filters

Q: Can I use these functions in SQL queries?
A: Yes, all UC Functions can be called directly in SQL. Example:
   SELECT * FROM humana_quality.hedis_gold.lookup_member('M000001')
   
   They can also be joined with other tables:
   SELECT m.*, g.* 
   FROM members m
   CROSS JOIN humana_quality.hedis_gold.lookup_member_gaps(m.member_id) g

Q: How do I get help if I can't find the answer?
A: Try these steps in order:
   1. Use Knowledge Assistant to search for specific topics
   2. Check this FAQ for common questions
   3. Use Genie Space to explore the data
   4. Contact the Quality Analytics team for complex questions
   5. Review HEDIS specifications at NCQA.org for measure-specific details

=== OPERATIONAL QUESTIONS ===

Q: How do I prioritize which gaps to close first?
A: Prioritization strategy:
   1. High-weight measures (CDC, CBP, COL) - 3x revenue impact
   2. Gaps closing soon (< 60 days until December 31) - urgency
   3. Members with multiple gaps - efficiency
   4. Historically responsive members - higher success rate
   5. High-risk members - clinical importance
   
   Use members_with_gap('MEASURE_CODE') and filter by these criteria.

Q: What's the best way to reach out to members?
A: Multi-channel approach works best:
   1. Phone call (3 attempts over 2 weeks) - highest engagement
   2. Mailed letter if no phone contact - backup method
   3. PCP coordination for clinical services - leverage trust
   4. FIT kit mailing for COL - removes barriers
   5. Appointment scheduling assistance - reduce friction

Q: How do I track my gap closure progress?
A: Use Genie Space with queries like:
   - "How many BCS gaps closed this month?"
   - "Show me gap closure trend for CDC"
   - "Compare gaps closed vs open by measure"
   
   The gap_closure_tracking table has historical data for monitoring progress.

Q: What's the typical gap closure rate?
A: Varies by measure:
   - BCS: 60-65% with proactive outreach
   - CDC: 70-75% with PCP coordination
   - CBP: 65-70% (requires clinical intervention)
   - COL: 50-55% (member engagement challenge)
   - OMW: 70-75% (smaller population, timely intervention)

Q: How much does it cost to close a gap?
A: Typical costs:
   - Outreach cost per member: $25-50 (calls, letters, coordination)
   - Service cost: Covered by capitation (already budgeted)
   - Net ROI: 2:1 to 6:1 (revenue per gap closed vs outreach cost)
   - Breakeven: 250-500 gaps closed pays for entire gap closure program

Q: When should I start gap closure outreach?
A: Best practice timeline:
   - Q1 (Jan-Mar): Identify gaps from prior year, plan strategy
   - Q2 (Apr-Jun): Begin outreach on high-priority measures
   - Q3 (Jul-Sep): Intensive outreach, all measures
   - Q4 (Oct-Dec): Final push, focus on easy closures
   - Critical period: October-December (3 months before deadline)

=== REPORTING QUESTIONS ===

Q: What reports should I run weekly?
A: Recommended weekly reports:
   1. Gaps opened this week (new gaps)
   2. Gaps closed this week (progress tracking)
   3. Members contacted (outreach tracking)
   4. Appointments scheduled (pipeline)
   5. High-priority gaps (< 60 days until due)

Q: What reports should I run monthly?
A: Recommended monthly reports:
   1. Compliance rate by measure (trend tracking)
   2. Gap closure rate by measure (effectiveness)
   3. Star rating projection (goal tracking)
   4. Revenue impact calculation (ROI)
   5. Benchmark comparison (performance assessment)

Q: Who should receive quality reports?
A: Distribution list:
   - Executive leadership: Monthly summary, star rating projection
   - Quality management: Weekly detailed reports
   - Care management: Weekly member gap lists
   - PCP offices: Monthly practice-level gap reports
   - Network management: Quarterly provider performance

Q: How do I create a gap closure campaign report?
A: Key metrics to include:
   1. Starting gap count (baseline)
   2. Members contacted (outreach volume)
   3. Response rate (engagement)
   4. Appointments scheduled (pipeline)
   5. Services completed (outcomes)
   6. Gaps closed (results)
   7. Remaining gaps (work remaining)
   8. Compliance rate improvement (impact)
   9. Revenue impact (ROI)

Q: What format should reports be in?
A: Depends on audience:
   - Executive: PowerPoint with visuals, one-page summary
   - Operational: Excel with detailed data, sortable columns
   - Clinical: PDF with member lists, gap details
   - Web: Interactive dashboards (use Genie for ad-hoc queries)

